projects/individual/ChatGPT-WM/README.md, before:

# Assessing Working Memory Capacity of Large Language Models (LLMs) Using N-back Tasks

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f968575a-00be-4453-bc62-5d9237fa26fe)

This is a code and dataset repository for the paper "**[Working Memory Capacity of ChatGPT: An Empirical Study](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03731)**", which has been accepted by AAAI 2024 Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Here we created a dataset to test the working memory capacity of language models. We choose the N-back task because it is widely used in cognitive science as a measure of working memory capacity. To create the N-back task dataset, we generated 30 blocks of trials for $N = \{1, 2, 3\}$, respectively. Each block contains 30 trials, including 10 match trials and 20 nonmatch trials. The dataset for each block is stored in a text file. The first line in the text file is the letter presented on every trial. The second line is the condition corresponding to every letter in the first line ('m':this is a match trial; '-': this is a nonmatch trial). We have created many versions of the N-back task, including verbal ones and spatial ones.

**Prompt Example.** Here we only focus on the base version of verbal N-back tasks. We use the following format of prompts for $N = \{1, 2, 3\}$:
```
User:
Instruction: as a language model, you are asked to perform a 1-back task. A letter will be presented on every trial. Your task is to respond with 'm' whenever the letter presented is the same as the previous letter, and '-' whenever the letter presented is different from the previous letter. A strict rule is that you must not output anything other than 'm' or '-'. Now begins the task.

User:
{letter}
Model:
{-}(because this is the first letter)

User:
{letter}
Model:
{m/-}

...
```

```
User:
Instruction: as a language model, you are asked to perform a 2-back task. A letter will be presented on every trial. Your task is to respond with 'm' whenever the letter presented is the same as the letter two trials ago, and '-' whenever the letter presented is different from the letter two trials ago. A strict rule is that you must not output anything other than 'm' or '-'. Now begins the task.

User:
{letter}
Model:
{-}(because this is the first letter)

User:
{letter}
Model:
{m/-}

...
```

```
User:
Instruction: as a language model, you are asked to perform a 3-back task. A letter will be presented on every trial. Your task is to respond with 'm' whenever the letter presented is the same as the letter three trials ago, and '-' whenever the letter presented is different from the letter three trials ago. A strict rule is that you must not output anything other than 'm' or '-'. Now begins the task.

User:
{letter}
Model:
{-}(because this is the first letter)

User:
{letter}
Model:
{m/-}

...
```

**Metrics.** We use exact match of the extraction results to calculate the hit rate, false alarm rate, and accuracy. $d'$ (detection sensitivity) is calculated as the $z$ score of hit rate minus the $z$ score of false alarm rate. In the case where the hit rate or false alarm rate is equal to either 0 or 1, they will be adjusted by 0.01 to handle the problem of $z$ score being infinite.

Commit message:

Update README and add final export documents (docx, pdf)

projects/individual/ChatGPT-WM/README.md, after:

# Assessing Working Memory Capacity of Large Language Models (LLMs) Using N-back Tasks

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f968575a-00be-4453-bc62-5d9237fa26fe)

**Individual Project Note:** This repository is an extension of the original AAAI 2024 paper [Working Memory Capacity of ChatGPT: An Empirical Study](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03731). This project evaluates **Google's Gemini 2.5 Flash** using the foundational verbal N-back task to compare its active working memory capacity against the original ChatGPT baseline. The full methodology, findings, and statistical testing for this project are documented in `report.md`.

## Reproducing the Gemini 2.5 Flash Evaluation
To reproduce the Gemini 2.5 Flash results and statistical analysis for this project:
1. Ensure you have the `google-genai` and `scipy` packages installed.
2. Set your Gemini API key:
   ```bash
   export GEMINI_API_KEY="your_api_key_here"
   ```
3. Run the data collection notebook to gather results from the API:
   - Execute `experiments/verbal_gemini.ipynb`.
   - *Note: This will interact with the Gemini API to run 50 blocks of 1-back, 2-back, and 3-back tasks and save the raw results to `results/gemini_results.json`.*
4. Run the analysis and visualization notebook:
   - Execute `analysis_across_exps.ipynb`.
   - This notebook will load the JSON file, calculate Hit Rate, False Alarm Rate, Accuracy, and $d'$, and output the statistical distributions and non-parametric test results (Kruskal-Wallis, Mann-Whitney U, Wilcoxon).

---

## Original Repository Context
Here we created a dataset to test the working memory capacity of language models. We choose the N-back task because it is widely used in cognitive science as a measure of working memory capacity. To create the N-back task dataset, we generated 30 blocks of trials for $N = \{1, 2, 3\}$, respectively. Each block contains 30 trials, including 10 match trials and 20 nonmatch trials. The dataset for each block is stored in a text file. The first line in the text file is the letter presented on every trial. The second line is the condition corresponding to every letter in the first line ('m':this is a match trial; '-': this is a nonmatch trial). We have created many versions of the N-back task, including verbal ones and spatial ones.

**Prompt Example.** Here we only focus on the base version of verbal N-back tasks. We use the following format of prompts for $N = \{1, 2, 3\}$:
```
User:
Instruction: as a language model, you are asked to perform a 1-back task. A letter will be presented on every trial. Your task is to respond with 'm' whenever the letter presented is the same as the previous letter, and '-' whenever the letter presented is different from the previous letter. A strict rule is that you must not output anything other than 'm' or '-'. Now begins the task.

User:
{letter}
Model:
{-}(because this is the first letter)

User:
{letter}
Model:
{m/-}

...
```

```
User:
Instruction: as a language model, you are asked to perform a 2-back task. A letter will be presented on every trial. Your task is to respond with 'm' whenever the letter presented is the same as the letter two trials ago, and '-' whenever the letter presented is different from the letter two trials ago. A strict rule is that you must not output anything other than 'm' or '-'. Now begins the task.

User:
{letter}
Model:
{-}(because this is the first letter)

User:
{letter}
Model:
{m/-}

...
```

```
User:
Instruction: as a language model, you are asked to perform a 3-back task. A letter will be presented on every trial. Your task is to respond with 'm' whenever the letter presented is the same as the letter three trials ago, and '-' whenever the letter presented is different from the letter three trials ago. A strict rule is that you must not output anything other than 'm' or '-'. Now begins the task.

User:
{letter}
Model:
{-}(because this is the first letter)

User:
{letter}
Model:
{m/-}

...
```

**Metrics.** We use exact match of the extraction results to calculate the hit rate, false alarm rate, and accuracy. $d'$ (detection sensitivity) is calculated as the $z$ score of hit rate minus the $z$ score of false alarm rate. In the case where the hit rate or false alarm rate is equal to either 0 or 1, they will be adjusted by 0.01 to handle the problem of $z$ score being infinite.
